---
layout: post
title: "Speed skating talent management app"
date: 2018-02-13
---

I published the code of the Shiny front-end to my speed skating app at [GitHub](https://github.com/pjastam/shiny-speedskating). This app is useful for talent management by scouts, trainers and coaches of speed skating teams. [Speed skating](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_skating) is a popular winter sport in [the Netherlands](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netherlands).

The reason for building this app is that talent management of junior speed skaters with the potential to become a professional athlete may be hampered by a lack of strong(er) competition from their same age peers during their daily training routine. There are two explanations why the probability of strong competition for high potential junior speed skaters is small. First of all, the number of high potentials of a given age is small due to the small population size of the Netherlands. Second, the junior speed skaters are assigned to a number of training facilities which are distributed across the country. Thus, within each training facility, the number of junior speed skaters with the potential of a professional career is even smaller.

As a consequence, outperformance of these peers may not be a good indicator of the potential of a junior speed skater to become a professional. A better indicator might be the performance of professional speed skaters during the days that they were of the same age as the junior speed skater.

#### How does this app help?
As explained above, the probability of strong competition heavily depends on the year of birth and place of residence (and therefore, assignment to a specific training district) of a high potential. Obviously, one step towards better talent management is to pool and monitor the results of junior speed skaters of a given age across all training districts. A further step would be to make comparisons across generations of high potential speed skaters. Although both kinds of comparison are facilitated by the 'shiny-speedskating' app, the true added value of this app derives from facilitating the across generations comparison.

More specifically, the 'shiny-speedskating' app graphs the best monthly track times of junior speed skaters and the best monthly track times of professional speed skaters, thereby adjusting for the difference in dates of birth. We chose to use best monthly track times in order to reduce the influence of statistical coincidence (alternatively, one might choose for average monthly track times). Note that as we adjust for date of birth instead of year of birth, we also take account of differences in development among speed skaters within the same year of birth.

The 'shiny-speedskating' app generates a benchmark for current track times of junior speed skaters. But in addition it can also be used as a reference career path in terms of future track times. The reason is that the track times of the professional speed skaters at later ages and during their professional career are also graphed with this app. In this way, more recent track times of professional speed skaters can be used for the career development of high potential junior speed skaters too.

##### ** Demo **

You can find an interactive demo of the app [here](https://pjastam.shinyapps.io/speedskating/). You can choose a junior speed skater in the first select box and a professional speed skater in the second select box. The input checkbox is checked by default, in which case the difference in birth dates between these two speedskaters is adjusted for. The graph is redrawn each time one of these three choices is altered.

We used a small sample of data to illustrate the workings of this app. The track times of the junior and professional speed skaters are extracted from [SpeedskatingResults.com](http://speedskatingresults.com/) via their Public API. We made a selection of three junior speed skaters from the population of junior speed skating champions in 2017 and before, see [Wikipedia](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nederlandse_kampioenschappen_schaatsen_junioren) (in Dutch). And we selected three professional speed skaters: [Patrick Roest](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_Roest), [Kay Verbij](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kai_Verbij), and [Hein Otterspeer](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hein_Otterspeer). The track times of these speed skaters were extracted from [SpeedskatingResults.com](http://speedskatingresults.com/) via their Public API. Note that we chose relatively young professional speed skaters, because the track times of the elderly professionals in their younger years were not available as open data to the best of our knowledge.

#### Ideas for improvement

This app can be further developed in lots of different ways. One way for improvement is to take further account of context variables. More specifically, in this app track times are adjusted for difference in birth dates, but they may be influenced by other factors too. Think of location of the speed skating event, the trainer/coach/team of the speed skater or personal traits of individual speed skaters (gender, length, etc.). The exact influence of each of these so-called confounders can be determined by the estimation of an econometric model. The resulting parameter estimates can then be used in the app and result in additional checkboxes which can be checked. Note that this kind of analysis would require much more data sources and a trained econometrician/statistician/epidemiologist to choose the right prediction model setup and apply the appropriate technique to estimate the model parameters.

A second route for improvement is to develop the backend. The data are now loaded into the app in a static way. To load more recent data interactively into the app, a backend functionality to this Shiny app is needed. I have developed a first version of this backend, but this one is not efficient enough and should be developed as a separate backend development project.
  
Please feel free to contact me if you would like to contribute in either of these ways. You can contact me at my GitHub email address if you would like to share your thoughts on this app.